0.3-4416  Yaffa Goldwasser  033c-2167

Interview with: Yaffa Goldwasser
Interviewer: Yitzhak Alfrovitz
Date of Interview: April 1, 1991
Place of Interview: Heichal Volhyn
Printing: “Haktav”

Q:  The recorded testimony of Mrs. Yaffa Goldwasser, born in Radom, on her experiences during the Holocaust.    

A:   My name is Yaffa Goldwasser, my maiden name was Zucker.  I was born in Radom in 1924.  Until the outbreak of the war, I was a high school student.  I studied in the “Hovevei Daat” Jewish high school.  My father was a merchant in Radom.

Q:   What was his name?

A:   His name was Moshe Zucker.  He was a merchant.  We had warehouses and a shop for stationery and writing materials.

Q: How many sisters and brothers?   

A:   There were seven brothers and me.  I was the only daughter.  They were all older than me.  I was – there was no one younger than me.  All the brothers were in Poland.  One brother went to Belgium in 1928.  
When the war broke out we were all in Radom.  Two brothers were married.  One lived in Skarzysko with his wife and the other lived in Radom with his wife and their little boy.  When the war broke out, we couldn’t, at least my father couldn’t go into our shop out of fear, because when the Germans occupied Radom, the decrees and maltreatment already started.  We were simply afraid for my father to leave the house.  My brothers used to go out.  They would take them very often actually for forced labor and would maltreat them.  I remember how they looked sometimes when they would come back from work.  They would say:  "??? ???? ?????..."  - from the experience they had with the Germans at the time.  But during that time they would go to our store.  At that time the Germans would arrive with a truck and load it with goods in a very official manner.  They didn’t steal it.  They brought a paper that said they were officially taking the goods to some offices, I don’t know, for their needs.  And over time, since our store was in a very central location in town, on the main street, they began to come and complain that a Jew’s store could not be there.  But the store owner was a Pole and for some reason, not out of love for the Jews but hatred for the Germans, he didn’t want to hand the store over to anyone else.  He said he had no complaints against that man.  My father had had the store in that place for forty years.  And we stayed right up to the time when Jews were forbidden to run that kind of store and they had to put a trustee (‘treuhander’) in there.
	To tell the truth, we knew such a danger awaited us.  So we tried that the treuhander would be one of the people we knew.  We had one of our customers, who was a volksdeutsche.  We decided he would submit his candidacy and he got the ??????.  He was a volksdeutsche who during the war found it perhaps convenient to be a volksdeutsche.  He applied for it and got the store.  We thought conditions would be more convenient with this.  He took my brothers to work for him.  They worked in that store.  And we were on quite good terms with him.  There was forced labor during that time.  At that time my brothers were either abducted or taken by force.  They also paid other workers and sent them.  The Judenrat would send workers and receive ransom from the Jews who were busy with commerce or other such things.  

Q:  What about you?  Did they send you to work too?  Weren’t you a teacher?   

A:   At the beginning of the war, the Judenrat asked girls who had studied in high school to teach the children because there were no schools for little children.  So I had very many private lessons, I had groups of children who came to me and I taught them.  Besides that I went to work volunteering in an old folk’s home in Radom.  Suddenly there was a lot of trouble and they said they needed people to work in the old folk’s home.  So I went to work as a volunteer in the old folk’s home.
	And afterwards, as time went on, it began like this, we simply thought (I didn’t get to that yet).  We came to … when there was a ghetto.

Q:  When was the ghetto set up in Radom?  

A:  On the first of April, exactly, in 1941.

Q:  You mean all the Jews from the main streets apparently, where the Jews lived in the Christian district, were transferred to the ghetto. 

A:   There were two ghetto districts in Radom.  One ghetto was bigger and the second ghetto had 8,000 Jews that lived in the smaller ghetto. 8,000, not 8,000 … no, eight thousand, right.  All together there were over 30,000 Jews in the Radom ghetto and the rest were in the big ghetto.
	We had to leave our apartment, of course, together with all the other Jews and we entered the ghetto.  We had a room there with a tiny kitchen and we were crowded.  We were a big family.  I should also emphasize that one of my brothers, who already lived in Skarzysko, was quite a wealthy Jew.  When the Germans came in, the Gestapo took him right away as a hostage because they gave a contribution for that town and he was among the hostages that they took.  And there, by the way, he was married there for eleven years and he didn’t have any children.  He suffered there.  It’s hard to describe.  They beat them but they released them in the end after they paid the ransom.  When he came back, during the hardest time, we really didn’t know what was going to happen.  I personally felt during that period, from the beginning of the war, as if a noose was hanging over my neck, that every day was getting tighter and tighter.  Every day I was afraid to wake up in the morning because I knew there would be a new decree.  Every day there was a decree and every decree seemed to me to be directed at us, at my family.  Because I had young brothers who would either be taken for different types of labor or in another way they were – we had to pay ransom every time.  Every day something else.
    
Q:  What was your family’s situation?

A:  We were tradesman.
  
Q:  I know, but in the ghetto?   
A:  Also in the ghetto.  All the while my brothers worked for that treuhander we didn’t really suffer from hunger like all around us.   On the contrary, we could even help others, other relatives that used to come to our house.  Because that treuhander, we knew him, he used to give us more than what he had to so we could buy things to live on.
   
Q:  As a young girl, what events in the ghetto are marked on your memory?  What can you tell me?   

A:   What frightened me the most was the period when the Aktionen began.

Q:  When did the first Aktion begin?

A:  At the beginning of November 1942.  They began the Aktionen for certain risk groups.  One time, they took former Zionists.  They actually came with lists of names of people who had been in a Zionist organization.  In the middle of the night, they entered the houses, knocked on the door and asked: Are you this and this person?  And if you weren’t that person, they took you anyway.  Either they shot that person or sent him to Auschwitz.  At another time, we didn’t know when, it was former communists.
	Bezalel Kastner, that’s who they were looking for.
   
Q:  He was in Radom?  

A:   No, he was out of the country.  But he had a cousin by the same name.  He was a Gur hasid by chance.  A cousin, and his brother-in-law, the same first name and family name.  So they came to that cousin, as if he were a Communist or what they thought he was – and he was an orthodox Jew, with side locks.  They took him for that and shot him, they killed him or sent him to Auschwitz – no one knew, because he disappeared that night.  That’s it.  They did have lists, but they weren’t exactly accurate.
	Once there was an Aktion.  Those were terrible days, an Aktion of ritual slaughterers.  People who were ritual slaughterers.  Another time – butchers.  The Jewish police were also active searching for Jews because they had simply recruited them for that purpose.  And many times also …
 
Q:   Who was the Jewish police chief, do you remember? 

A:   Yes, it was Serota, he was the police commander of the Jewish police.

Q:  What was the name of the head of the Judenrat?  Do you remember?

A:  Josef Diamant.  He, I remember many times they used to come looking for young men that they needed for some purpose.  My brothers – the policemen used to come to our house to look for my brothers.  They looked under the beds, broke things.  Jewish policemen too.  Because that was their mission.  I remember my father who stood aside saying: “Blowing, blowing, bad winds are whirling.  This is your time”  There was a Yiddish song like that.  And afterwards, we felt each time, we anticipated, we waited for worse things to come.  In general, we lost all human rights, because the Poles with respect to us could also do whatever they wanted.  Also, as soon as the war broke out, I think it was a month or two after the Germans occupied Poland, my uncle – my father’s eldest brother -    

Q:   What was his name?

A:   His name was Fishel Zucker.  He was  a Jew 80 years old then, a talmudic scholar who was even photographed in Der Stuermer as a talmudist.  So some Pole came to him and simply murdered him.  He was a ritual slaughterer at the time.  He slaughtered him and his wife.  They actually found him, they caught the fellow but no one - they didn’t take him or arrest him.  They didn’t even pay any attention to it.  The same thing with us.  There was a robbery at the time of the small ghetto and they didn’t deal with it at all.  Because they came with rifles, emptied the house, everything that was inside our house.  On the other hand, all the time …    

Q:   You were in the small ghetto?

A:   In the ghetto, in the ghetto.

Q:   When was the ghetto divided into two – the big ghetto and the small ghetto?

A:  No, no.  The big ghetto and the small ghetto – I’m talking about the small ghetto.  I was  - what I call the ‘small ghetto’, that was after the deportation in August 1942. When there was the big deportation and altogether 4,000 Jews were left, then everyone stayed in the same ghetto and that was the small ghetto.

Q:  Made smaller, actually.

A: Yes.  That was the ‘small ghetto’.

Q:  Tell me please about the Aktion.

A:  The Aktion was – first of all, we, as much as it was terrible, we expected more horrible things.  We were aware that the worst awaited us.  In any case, in our house.  I know we had relatives also in Lublin.  And already on Passover 1942 three cousins from Lublin arrived and said that from Lublin they had already sent, took all the Jews from the ghetto and sent them to Treblinka.  We heard about Treblinka then for the first time and he told us that Treblinka was no labor camp.  It was an extermination camp.  That they finish off the Jews there.  He told us that on Passover 1942.  I remember, it was around Passover 1942.  And they, the three brothers, succeeded in escaping and came to us and were in Radom.  Then we heard every day where the deportation was starting.  It was earlier in Warsaw than in Radom.  It began in Warsaw on the Ninth of Av, the first day of the deportation in Warsaw and we knew that that was the end.  We didn’t have any delusions.  There were people in the ghetto, however, who deluded themselves and thought they were going to work, but not us.  In our house we were aware that that was the end.  And we began to take care of it, how to save ourselves, how to survive.  We thought of this possibility – that each would have some kind of profession.
At that time the Judenrat organized a course for nurses.  The theoretical part of the course lasted six weeks and the practical work – one week.  And we received a diploma, that I was a nurse, as it were, a caregiver, a certain document that’s called in Polish, a diploma.  We thought that might save us in case of some Aktion.  My brother went to learn another profession, since my brothers didn’t have a profession.  So my brother learned another profession.  In the end I didn’t get a job in a hospital according to those things, but one of my brothers was taken to work in the Luftwaffe.  He spoke with the work manager there, the German, and asked him maybe he could employ all his other brothers and that he also had a father, who was old.  My father was relatively old then.  That he would employ the whole family, we wanted to be employed so that we’d also have a certificate that we were working someplace.  I also started as if to work.  I really worked.  But sometimes they took me from the Luftwaffe to other work places.  Suddenly I stood there to go out to work.  Another German came over, took me and sent me to do his laundry.  I was washing and I was bleeding because I didn’t know exactly how to wash properly.  Afterwards, they gave me leftover food from their lunch.  But I continued working in the Luftwaffe, until … 
when they began saying that they were preparing lights, that they were getting ready for an Aktion, for deportation.  Then we knew it was the end.
	My brother asked the German he was working for: “We are in great danger, can something be done?”  So he said, “I employ you not in the city, not in Radom, so maybe move to some village, near Radom, and go to some farmers.  You can live with those farmers and come to me to work.  So that’s how it was – about one hundred people worked for him, at the German’s.

Q:  What kind of work was it?

A: I worked on the road.  I broke up large stones into small ones.  I worked on the road.  So we went to a village, some village – Paznice, that was close to the place of work there and we went to the villagers.  We told them we would pay them to let us sleep in the barns.  We would sleep in the barns and they would let us.  And they agreed.  They got money and they agreed.  About one hundred Jews were in that small village.  It’s a village between Szydlowiec and Radom.  So we went out in the morning to work, and the same time that we, about 2-3 days after we left the city, a day later, the big deportation began and they took all the Jews from the Radom ghetto.  All of them.  They left about 4,000 or 3,000 Jews.  I don’t remember exactly.  I think they left 4,000 Jews after the big deportation.
	We were in that village and in that village there was indescribable suffering because the young Poles played a game.  Every night they would bang where we were and they would shout: “Laus, raus, raus!”  They would frighten us as if the Germans had come to take us.  When we went outside it turned out that they had only been joking.  In the end, the Germans apparently found out that we were in that village and since in Radom there had already been a deportation and in Szydlowiec there wasn’t one yet, they gave an order one night that all the Jews in that village Paznice would move to Szydlowiec.  We knew that that was certainly because there would be deportation from Szydlowiec and we’d be part of the deportation.  So we decided it would be wise now to go back to Radom and join the small group of Jews that had remained.
But how to move to Radom?  So my brother went outside.  He had a good appearance, relatively speaking.  He looked like a Pole (that was called ‘a good appearance’).  He walked around and saw a Pole, a policeman.  He went over to him, got up nerve and went over to that policeman and told him that he wanted to offer him money and things.  He still had some ??????? , he had a shop then with … so he would take us to Radom in the evening.  He would say he had arrested us and was bringing us to that city, so that we could sleep by – we’d give him the address.  We went to sleep at the gentile’s Shtompkeh – the man who was in our store.  We came to his house at ten o’clock at night, eleven o’clock at night with the Polish policeman and we went in.
He was startled and he let us spend the night in his cellar.  In the morning, however, he said the neighbors had said that they thought they had seen Jews there at night, but we hadn’t intended to stay there.  We asked him to go out and  the first Jewish policeman that he would see who was leading the Jews from the (small) Radom ghetto, to ask him to come here and he would ask the policeman to join them in the evening and to return to the small Radom ghetto.  And that’s how it was.  He brought us a policeman and the policeman said that since we had fifteen people he couldn’t bring back another 8-10 people.  We were a large family.  He said he would take four of us.  He would come in the afternoon,  some he would take before than afterwards he would have the possibility of taking back exactly ten in the evening – ten people. He would also tell other policemen and we had to pay those policemen as well.  And they arranged it that we moved to the small ghetto.
We arrived in the small ghetto.  Of course there was no place for us so we received a kind of hole that we all had to be in.  In a small hole we lived together with some other families.  We built sort of planks so that we could sleep up above.  The conditions were, I don’t know – hell on earth.  The men would go out to work, including my father. And my father, really, life was no longer comfortable for him.  He didn’t have, like he said, a friend.  There also weren’t many people of his age, he didn’t have his own world and he didn’t want anymore, really didn’t want anymore.  He had no desire to live because you could only expect much worse.  We saw he was completely demoralized.  Somehow we wanted to survive.  From day to day our own will also became weaker.  What it was – life was very hard for us.  During that time it was terribly hard.  At that time we also heard  - by the way, I’m telling you, that brother that I told about who we had in Skarzysko – 

Q:  What was his name?

A:  Leibl was his name, he was without children for eleven years. After he was released from the Gestapo his wife became pregnant. During precisely the most terrible time she got pregnant.  And since he had no children for so many years, they of course kept the pregnancy and she gave birth to a baby girl.  They and the baby were in Skarzysko.  At that time we were after the deportation; in Skarzysko there apparently was no deportation yet.  So somehow or other we found a way to get a note to them that they should come to us since there had already been a deportation here.  So all of them came to us.  First he sent his wife and baby daughter and then he came as well, a month later.  We were all in the same hole and every day I went out to work with that same Luftwaffe.  After the deportation a job became available in Radom that was considered an exceptional place.  It was the S.S. warehouses.  The S.S. was in charge of that place.  They gathered all the property of the Jews from the houses and the shops and stored it in the warehouses.  It was like that, in a neighborhood far from Radom, inside warehouses.  There they separated everything according to sections.  Here there was newspaper and there, there was porcelain and here were manufactured goods (‘manufactura’), like a kind of section and also all kinds of things.  They called that place ‘Korona’.
The German who was in charge of that place of work, his name was Urlich and he collected women.  He usually picked young women, for work, and there were two Jewish policemen who also came with him and worked in that place.
That place was considered a good one because in that place it was possible for the Jews to live.  They would steal things from there.  They were warehouses of wealth, of all kinds of things.  They would steal and put the things in their coat and then came to the ghetto.  And if someone were to take from them afterwards near the gate, some fellow near the Aryan side, they would sell it and in that way they could survive.
Everyone wanted to work for that Urlich.  It was also a very safe place because it belonged to the S.S.

Q:  How did he treat you?

A:  When he would go somewhere, he would go with the group of those women, then he would frighten everyone because he would shout, scream.  He would ride on a bicycle and would shout: “Get out of the way (Raus)!”.  It was forbidden for a Pole to cross the road because “my women” were walking now.  It was as if the street was free only for “his women” who were going to work.  
	One day, I was standing beside my father and my brother waiting for our German to come and take us to the Luftwaffe to work.  Ulrich was looking for another woman for work.  Dozens of women fell at his feet and wanted to go with him.  He hit them and threw them aside and didn’t want any.  Then he turned around and suddenly noticed me.  I purposely didn’t look in his direction.  He came over to me and said I should go with him.  I didn’t want to go with him at all and I began to explain that I was working at the Luftwaffe.  Then he started to shout: “But I’m talking here, and I am the S.S.!  I’m the one that decides here.”  Then my father said (since there was a kind of rule in the family, which may also have caused a disaster, that we wanted very much to be together, that in every place of work, wherever it was, we should only be together, not to separate.  We felt a certain danger if we didn’t support one another.  Then …

Q:  How long did the family succeed in staying together?

A:  That’s it, until now we had succeeded.  When it broke out – I didn’t even tell about that in the beginning, but when, when the war began, when the stream of men began to the east to Russia, then one of my brothers also wanted to flee to Russia.  My father was so miserable that he wasn’t beside him and he also missed us so much, that after about three weeks he came back to us.  Maybe he also perished because of that, he didn’t survive, he didn’t stay there on that side.
	So my father began to ask him, that we were afraid if we separated – and I felt that.  I had an instinctive feeling that if I separated, my fate would be different from theirs.  And I didn’t want that.  So my father asked and began to say that we were all together – then he raised the – he had a kind of whip from rubber, he raised it and threatened that he would beat him.  He didn’t beat my father, but he threatened and he said: “You have to go!”

Q:   And in the end?

A:  I went crying.  When I went into line I was crying.  He came over when we were already on our way and he asked me then: “Why are you crying?  You’ll see you won’t be sorry that you are with us.  It’ll be good for you.  You won’t be sorry”.  But I persisted and said: “But I wanted to be together with my family.”
	I got there and he put me in the beginning to this work place for glass.  He gave the impression that he was very bad outwardly but I think he was a good man.  He came over to me several times that day and asked if I was still sorry that I was with him that I was working there.
	In the end, when I came home and my parents – I wasn’t happy for that reason and I wasn’t satisfied but I accepted it.  I had no choice and I thought, maybe maybe nevertheless we’ll be together in spite of everything even though I was working in another place.  I worked in ‘Korona’ and they worked in the ‘Luftwaffe’.  And in the meantime there was another Aktion for adults.  I was terribly afraid that they would take my father and we were really all very frightened for him.  So when they called out his name, my brother was exactly 20 at the time, he went in his place.  And the Germans didn’t care.  So my brother went and my father stayed.  And my brother knew, he knew that the whole family was on that side, so he somehow escaped.  He really escaped and came back.  And we were together again, glad that we were all together.  At that time, we weren’t happy but we somehow or other got along.

Q:  How long did that last?

A:  It lasted until January, January 13, 1943.  Before January 13, 1943, they began at the beginning of January, to take, to make a list, whoever has relatives in Israel.  By chance I had a grandfather in Israel, in Eretz Israel.  I had a grandfather, my mother’s parents.

Q:  What was his name?

A:  Moshe Baum.  He lived in Bnei Braq. There was a grandfather in Israel.  My mother’s parents, my mother’s sister and all my father’s family, all the Zuckers were there from 1921, ‘18’ from all those years they arrived already in the Third Aliyah and some of them even in the Second Aliyah.  I had very many relatives so the people of Radom used to come to us to look for addresses because we knew that the criteria for that Aktion would be whoever had relatives in Eretz Israel would stay, whoever did not have relatives was in danger, they would apparently send him to Treblinka or an extermination camp.
	So Jews began to stream to us, we should give them addresses of our relatives.  And we really had very many addresses without [?] and we distributed them and they gave them in.
	A day before, and we registered of course (we had a grandfather here, and the date) since we had relatives in Israel, and a day before the 13th, on the 12th of January, Urlich, that German came over to me and asked me: “Tell me”, he called me Zahara, “Tell me. Are your parents are on the list for Palestine?”  So I said, “Yes”.  “You should know, that it’s very important.  I’m ask as if they are dead or alive.  It’s a matter of life”.  So I went home and I said:  “I’m asking you, go again and check if you are really registered”.  At the time my brother was – he had broken a rib, and he could barely walk   Very late at night he went to the man from the Judenrat who was in charge of it - Zmeichikovski was his name - and he asked him if we were on the list, if he was sure.  “Why are you asking such stupid questions?  Of course you’re on the list!”  And in the end, the next morning, I went to the ‘Korona’ as usual because that was the wok place that you went to the earliest and they (the family) stayed to hear.  At our place in the Korona, whoever worked in ‘Korona’ did not depend at all on the list to Palestine.  They took (the workers) because it was the S.S.  In the other places you had to be on the list.  And we were not on the list.
	It happened like this, as happens in such cases with Jews, and perhaps also with other people as well.  There were all kinds of lists.  They drew up all kinds of lists and they really made sure that we were registered on that list and there was another list that they had corrected and they read out from the other list the next day.  And the next day, on January 13th when there was a deportation, in that terrible cold, they didn’t read out the names of my family.  And all my family went to Treblinka that day.  

Q:  On the same day?  The whole family?

A:  The whole family, except for one brother who at a certain moment saw that it was already the end – and he escaped.  And he remained.  His name was Meir.  Meir remained.  And when I came back from work in the evening I didn’t find anyone except for Meir.  My brother who had a child in Skarzysko also went with the family but his wife hid because she had a baby girl, to make sure - they were afraid that there might be a question (=doubt) - so she hid by a cousin who was a policeman, a relative of hers.  And the second sister-in-law with the child also hid.  But all my brothers went, except for the one who escaped, and we remained.

Q:  How many Jews did they take then, in that Aktion?

A:  I think 1,500.

Q:   And how many remained in Radom?

A:  In think another 1,500.

Q:  That’s all?

A:   That’s all.  I think a few more Jews.  And I reacted, I simply didn’t know how to continue living.  I didn’t know how.  I could no longer enter the hole that I was living in.  I went with my brother, with my brother that I stuck to, I went to some other family and I stayed there.  And the German where I worked, he saw what was happening to me, that Urlich.  He called over those in charge in the Judenrat, Shenderovich.  He called them all over to ‘Korona’.  They, as it were, came and showed him that we were on the list.  And they really showed him a forged list, another one, and I, and we were really registered on it.  Then he came over and said: “See, Zahara, you were really registered.  Why, maybe they didn’t hear the names?”  But they showed him the forged one.  And they weren’t, they really, and I remained with my brother.  What Ulrich did to me, I said to him: “You see?  I was afraid to come to work here, because I was afraid that my fate would be different.  I would have preferred to go to Treblinka with them than remain alone and live here.”  

Q:  What was his reaction?

A:  Then he said to me: “You’re not right.  You’re not right.  But your brother (my brother didn’t work in ‘Korona’), bring your brother here now so he’ll work together with you.”   And he began to work together with me in ‘Korona’.  ‘Korona’ lasted for another few months.  Not many.  And afterwards there were also – that job was finished.

Q:  What kind of work was there?

A:  After that, since they realized that I was very honest, then he gave me – I was in the ‘manufactura’.  Then I worked, it was a kind of work that we would arrange things like in shops, warehouses, arranging.  The Germans would come from all over the world and they would place an order and we would give them the goods that they had chosen in exchange for a kind of note.

Q:  When did that end?

A:  At the beginning of the summer …Yes, it was there, when I was working in that ‘manufactura’.  We had one Obershturmfuehrer Blum (they killed him afterwards).  He – his daughter was exactly my age – and she came to us to pick out  her wedding clothes, to our warehouses.  I stood in front of her and she would take things.  She took maybe twenty meters of cloth for a dress.  And he would say: “Nem shoin, nem shoin” ( If already, take a lot and the best).  And I was always frightened.  Once I stood before her and thought to myself – we were born almost at the same time and what was her fate and what was mine, the situation I was in at the time.  And after it was finished – he had great trust in me – he told me, since he knew that people took goods and he agreed that they take, because he wanted to give them the possibility, but on the other hand he didn’t want it to go too far.  Then he said that he would kill – I don’t know – himself – if he knew that I had taken things.  Because he was sure that I didn’t.  And I really didn’t take anything because there wasn’t what for.  I didn’t have the desire then.         
	What happened after that: I began to work – when that job was finished, nobody worked there any longer, then I began to work in turf – almost all of us began to work in turf [peat] - to dry out turf.  We worked in the summer.  It was also near Radom.  Until one day there was a kind of Aktion, I remember – an Aktion of small children, for children, for some reason for mothers and children and they drove them into a kind of room and they drove me also into that room.  I didn’t have a child, I didn’t have anything, and since I was without a child and everyone had children, one German who saw a child without a mother, put the child into my hand and said “This is your child”.  I was there with my sister-in-law, with her son, and we knew that they were taking us.  We knew that we were going to die, because mothers and children – then what?  And we waited only for the people that had to do it.  They closed us in a room and I physically felt that I was choking.  I actually thought I was going to die.  Before they would kill me.  I also remembered that I waited and my sister-in-law said to me, “Don’t be afraid, for we are going the way that all of us have gone, and we will go as if we will meet them somewhere, we will go the same way so we will be closer to them.  And I – we waited and waited and waited.  And those who apparently had to do it did not arrive and they let everyone go and we went out, we came back.  I was also saved then, I don’t know, by a miracle.  There were several times that I was saved and I didn’t do anything.  The hand of fate somehow led me and I was saved by a miracle.
	Afterwards for a short time my situation was good and immediately after that, they took me to Shkolne.  On Shkolne we worked - 

Q:  Shkolne was Shkolne street?

A:  We worked on Shkolne street – we also slept there, it was already a kind of camp.  It was near a weapons factory, near Tavornia Broni, it was.  Not far was a kind of camp, we slept there and worked during the day like here – it, we (how do you say it?) – munitions baskets.  That was our work.  And we were there in the camp.
	My brother did everything, of course, and he was together with me.  My sister-in-law, the one who had the baby, who was born after eleven years, was taken to the weapons factory, with the baby girl.  She was then already two years old.  A wonderful baby, smart and clever.  And it’s interesting, the reaction of the children, how they adjusted to it …

Q:  How long did you stay there in Shkolne? 

A: I was a few months in Shkolne,  I remember the time now.

[End of first side of cassette]

Q:  Second side, continuation of Mrs. Yaffa Goldwasser’s testimony.

A:  As I said, my sister-in-law who remained with the baby girl was also next to Shkolne, in a weapons factory.  There was another children’s Aktion on October 10th.

Q:  1942?

A:  October 10th, 1943 was the children’s Aktion, for mothers and children.  She was at work; the second sister-in-law was not with the child.  They shot her and her child, and they took the first sister-in-law’s child.  They took the baby girl.  When she returned from work she didn’t find the child.  She remained like that.  I don’t have to describe any more.

Q:  How many Jews did they take to Majdanek?  Women or men?

A:  Women and men. 

Q:  When was that?

A:  1943, maybe already the beginning of 1944.  January 1944.  I think so.

Q:  That was the end, the liquidation of the ghetto in Radom?

A:   It was almost.  I think some were left there in ??????  .  I don’t know.  I wasn’t there already.  I was in Majdanek.

Q:  Did they send your brother to Majdanek?

A:  I, when they picked out the people, when they called out the name Zucker, maybe they meant someone else, but I stepped out.  I thought it was me and I stepped out and they closed the circle and I was among them.  I was for Majdanek.  For us, we knew that Majdanek was like Treblinka, we thought it was an extermination camp.  My brother saw me and I saw him and he saw that I was included, so he went over and asked to volunteer to Majdanek.  And the German really told him, I remember, “Verruckte leute man kennen nicht ubernehmen” (We don’t take crazy people) - that he was completely out of his mind, but he went with me and I really, if I want to be honest with myself, I was glad that he was there.  I wanted to be with him and he came with me to Majdanek.
	And we were already intended for Majdanek, organized for the next morning, we’re going to Majdanek.  My sister-in-law knew we were going to Majdanek the next day.  She came to me in the evening and parted from me.  And I felt she was parting from me.  I told her in the morning – “There will be more another roll call and you will get out of it and I will see you again, so why are you clinging to me now?”  But she could not let go of me and she clung and clung.  In the morning I looked for her to tell her good-bye because I knew we would not see each other anymore, but she wasn’t there.  I asked the women where she was.  They were silent.  And it turned out that she had committed suicide that night – she tried to kill herself and she didn’t wake up in the morning.  She lost the baby girl.  And we were the only two people that were still close to her, from the family.  She apparently had no desire to live.  She took care of it.  She once gave a large diamond to a Gentile who brought her medicine so she could put herself to sleep.

Q:  Poison.

A:  Poison.  And she poisoned herself.  The doctor at the weapons factory was my cousin.  His name was Baum, Dr. Baum.  I asked the Jewish policeman who was in charge of guarding us when we go to Majdanek.  I said: “Look, my sister-in-law committed suicide.  I won’t see her again.  Let me go to her, I only want to see her – there’s still time, about an hour.”  So he let me go to her.  She lay there yellow looking and I called her and spoke to her – no, she didn’t hear me.  And my cousin the doctor said: “If only I could give you what she took.”  He knew that I was going to Majdanek.  And a German sat in the room where she was lying and guarded her so that she would get treatment.  And she got treatment, stomach pumping.  They pumped her stomach.

Q:  And it didn’t help.

A:  Yes it helped.  It helped.  I didn’t know.  I left for Majdanek with the feeling – I thought she wasn’t alive.

Q:  What was her name?

A:  Her name was Chava, Eva, Chava Zucker.  She was my brother’s wife.

Q:  And you?

A:  Me and my brother rode in a cattle car, like you arrive in Treblinka, we arrived in Majdanek.  And we really saw in Majdanek a world that we had never seen before.  I looked to us like a kind of graveyard.  We arrived in Majdanek during a period that was after they had already killed about 17-18,000 Jewish women and Jews from here who were from the Warsaw Ghetto Uprising.  They left 200 women from Warsaw there, the prettiest, the youngest, the most talented, really jewels, they were exceptional, they stayed.  And besides them there were Polish women, and there were all kinds of other prisoners.  The camp was very organized and terribly sad.  A kind of organization.  Really a cemetery in this world.  And I waited – when we arrived first of all, they separated us from the men.  Then I saw that my brother was with us and they separated us in a way that we couldn’t possibly see each other.  And besides that they put us in – we continued in the same kind of work that we had done in Shkolne with the korbe flechterei (basket weaving) and those in charge of us were political prisoners – not Poles – even Germans.  

Q:  In which field were you?

A:  I can’t tell you in which field.  I got the impression that there were statues there.  I saw statues.  I don’t know, maybe the prisoners did it.  There was a kind of silence and it was clean, and it was winter and snow all around.  And the S.S. women were usually in black pelerines.  They looked like kinds of frightening shouting birds, and there was terrifying quiet.

Q:  What did you work at there?

A:  I worked at basket weaving.  The same thing as in Shkolne – making munitions baskets.  I did the same work.  We had conditions for food – the soup they gave there from ?????? and that’s what there was.  But you know what?  I didn’t see my brother at all.  Since there was a political prisoner who was in charge of us, he had the possibility of also going to the men’s camp.  So I asked him since my brother was in the men’s camp.  I asked him because he wanted to help me.  He saw I was very depressed so he asked me – I asked him: “How can you help me so that I can see my brother once?”  So he told me,  “I’ll arrange for him to come.  We used knives there, when we worked, that he’ll come to sharpen them for you.  I need a man to sharpen the knives and I’ll take your brother.”  I told him his name and my brother came to me and I saw him.  I saw him.  Our conditions were hard, I mean we got up at three o’clock at night for roll call, it was very bad, terrifying.  But they didn’t maltreat us like they did the men.  I think a half or more than a half of the men that came to Majdanek didn’t survive the camp.  At night they used to make them do real exercises, simply to torture them, to maltreat them. And when I saw my brother, I saw that my brother was in a very bad condition.

Q:  He ended his life in Majdanek?

A:  He didn’t end his life in Majdanek.  He ended his life in Mauthausen.  But he came, Majdanek – that really started it for him.  He was already sick then. 

Q:  How long were you in Majdanek?

A:  I was in Majdanek until the spring.  I came in the winter and I was there until the spring.  In the spring we went to Plaszow. There was an Aktion then, also, the women who were from Warsaw.  Those women were wonderful to us.  Those that stayed wanted very much to help us.  And from the point of view of morale, in the evening they used to organize evenings.  They would give us recitations of a conversation between two pieces of soap that had met.  They were very talented.  That’s what they did for us, the ones from Warsaw.

Q:  There was a big chimney in Majdanek, where they burned.  Did you see it?

A:  Yes, of course.  And afterwards – they, afterwards, those women.  Each one received the letter A – “Aktion Jews”  They were apparently afraid that they would remain alive and when they took them out of Majdanek, when the front was coming closer, they wanted to liberate Majdanek, so they sent us to Plaszow and they finished them off, they simply finished them off, so they would not be witness to the terrible things that they did there.

Q:  And they sent you to Plaszow together with them?

A:  With them?  No.  They went separately.  Those two hundred women had a separate fate.

Q:  What was the reason they transferred you from Majdanek to Plaszow?  

A: Because the camp was liquidated.

Q:  Liquidation of the camp?

A:  The liquidation of the camp.  Because of the Russian front – because the Russians were coming closer.  They transferred us farther away, to Plaszow.  We arrived in Plaszow, and we thought the organization looked like it was run more by the Jews.  So we thought maybe it would be better, but it was much worse.  The Jews were – there was a Goldberg there in Plaszow, who was, and what’s his name who was the worst?  There was the manager, I forget his name for the moment.  In any case,  they took me immediately to work with the S.S. in the clothing room and the work was that I had to go into ovens.  They disinfected the military clothing of the German army and I had to go into the ovens and take out the clothes and clean them.  We did hard labor there in Plaszow.  My brother also came to Plaszow.

Q:  The conditions were worse than in Majdanek?

A:  We had bad conditions.  Generally there weren’t bad conditions because the Jews who had come from Cracow, who lived there, who had money, they were better then.  But we were without money, without anything – we couldn’t buy anything.  The work was also very hard.  My brother was in a terrible situation.  I saw that he was already a real musselman.  And I remember that I made superhuman efforts so that he should buy an egg.  I didn’t know what to do, because I saw my brother was in terrible condition.  One day in Plaszow after I was there for a time, they sent my brother to Wieliczka.  So I ran away again.  I ran through the field and I volunteered and went with him to Wieliczka. 
In Wieliczka we worked in the salt mines and I wasn’t – I almost never saw the light of day.  There was only once that they brought us one Sunday that we worked in some – that they made a work place apparently from a synagogue and there they made a workshop there and they brought us to clean something.  Then I saw only letters and I remember that I fainted when I saw the letters in Hebrew.  They were signs from the synagogue or something.  And I got so excited when I saw it because we were so far away from all that, and I saw my brother fading away also in Wieliczka.  He was a musselman.  There was a Zeitlin there, someone from the Zeitlin family was beside him, I remember.  Because both of them looked very bad.  In Wieliczka I had the possibility of seeing my brother, of going over to him.  I could even help him with something.

Q:  It was a small camp.

A:  It was a small camp, and I had good conditions, relatively speaking, because the people who were running the camp were nice, they were simply human beings.  The Jews, those policemen, they were also more humane.

Q:  How long were you in Wieliczka?           

A:  Also some two-three months, I think.  After that I went back to Plaszow for two weeks.

Q:  What do you mean you went back?

A:  I didn’t go back.  They took us.  They said: We’re going.  I didn’t know where to.  Suddenly I saw – I parted from my brother and I didn’t stay in Wieliczka.  I parted from him.  And I went to Plaszow.
	We weren’t in Plaszow a long time.  There was a liquidation.  I felt there was already utter confusion then.  Also when they were shooting, there was chaos.

Q:  The Russians were already approaching.

A:  I guess so.  The Germans were shooting.  I remember a situation that suddenly they took us in the direction of Auschwitz (it was still summer anyway).  In the middle of the roll call in camp the Germans began to shoot at us and we went up to the roof.  I jumped from up high and nothing happened to me but in the end I went with a transport from Plaszow to Auschwitz.  I arrived in Auschwitz and of course I went through everything that was customary in Auschwitz.  They cut off my hair and the selection and they gave us dresses to make us look funny, I don’t know, like it was Purim.  For example, they gave us, who were without hair, and we looked so bad, ball gowns, bare backed, or a dress with a high train.  I got a dress like that and we entered a hut.  

Q:  Excuse me, in Auschwitz, it was already the end of 1944?

A:  No it wasn’t, no.  Maybe even the end of summer.  And I was – I got half a dress in length.  And I remember, how funny we looked, we all looked humiliated and depressed.  

Q:  Which block did they send you to?

A:  Ten.

Q:  Block ten.  What was Block ten?

A:  Birkenau. The Plaszow transport was there.

Q:  When did they give out the personal number?   

A:  The number?  I think a few days later, about a day or two.

Q:  Tell me, what was the number?

A:  A-23040.

Q:  How many girls were in the your transport from Plaszow?

A:  I can’t say.

Q:  Approximately?  And they put them all into one block?

A:  Yes, all of us in one block.

Q:  Good, the conditions in Auschwitz are known.

A:  I just want to tell you because it is also connected with the Polish woman Trotsky.

Q:  Make it short.

A:  Since it was the beginning of autumn, as I said, and I was not dressed, I don’t know for what reason – I got sick.  I got very sick, because once, when I was standing at roll call, during the roll call, I fell down.  I fell down and the S.S. aufzehrein (overseer)  told me, she pushed me with her foot and said to take me to the revere (infirmary).  And they took me to the revere.  The revere is the end, from there you go to the crematorium, two steps, exactly – you hear screams and crying all the time.  And I went to the revere, but since I had a very high fever, and I wasn’t  - I didn’t even care, because I didn’t know.  I only wanted to lie down.  And I couldn’t …
	I arrived there.  There was a woman doctor.  A doctor from Hungary, who was apparently  - she got very upset when she saw me.  I had a very high fever and she asked me what was wrong with me.  I said: “Nothing.”  She measured my temperature and she saw that I apparently had an infection of the urinary tract, I think.  In any case, she gave me medicine, told me to lie down and asked me if I knew where I was from.  I said I was from Poland, from Radom.  After that she asked me if I had a family.  She was very excited.  I thought maybe …
She asked me whether I knew that the next day was a holiday, if I knew it.  I said I didn’t know.  And I told her that I was actually from a religious family but I didn’t know then what day it was.  I think she was somehow impressed with me, from my misery.  In any case, about an hour later she appeared with another woman doctor, also in a white coat and said to the second doctor: “This is her”.  By the way she gave an order to give me milk and white bread too.  I hadn’t seen milk and white bread for years.  Someone in the hospital grabbed it immediately and I didn’t taste it.  But the second doctor who came over to me asked me: “Are you from Poland?”  I said, “Yes”.  “Where are you from?”  I said: “From Radom”.  Then she asked me, “I have two friends from Radom, maybe you know them?  One of them is Abusch Verber and the other is Bunam Zucker.  He had only brothers and only one sister.”  While I was lying there I asked: “Is he alive?”  Then she said, “I saw him just three weeks ago.  We were together one Saturday night.  I went out and they arrested me and he remained and his wife is alive, the child is also alive.  They all have false papers.  He also has a passport that he is, as it were, a Swiss citizen.  And we worked together all the time, and we are in one group.  Come, you’ll see, we will meet one day at your brother’s.”  Then I said to her:  “You believe this because you are three weeks in the camps, but I have already been here much longer and I don’t think so.”   Then she said (She also said: “I must hold your face so that I can tell Bunam what you look like”)  “You know, if there is a selection here in the evening, will you know what to do?  Jump out before they call you from bed and go outside.  I’ll give you clothes …”

Q:  That was a Polish woman?

A:  She was a Polish woman.  “And I’ll give you clothes and you try tomorrow.  I’ll ask them to release you.  Never mind.  Whatever you have …”

Q:  How did things turn out afterwards?

A:  After that I was really about another day or two.  I jumped that same night.  The next day I already didn’t jump because I was afraid I’d fall.  I didn’t feel good.  So she hid me and I didn’t go out.  A day after that I already went out.  And she said: “Go out, go out, just don’t be here.”   So I went out and joined the transport.  But when I got to Auschwitz I was told that my sister-in-law who had tried to commit suicide was alive and was also in Auschwitz, and she was in Block 8.  When she heard that I had arrived she came to me and said: “Now we won’t separate any more, until the end.  Then I said to her: “But how?  I’m here and you’re there?  And it’s complicated.”  So then at night, and it’s forbidden in Auschwitz, she came to me at night, in the middle of the night.  She went up to the ?????'   and dragged me by force and both of us sneaked into the block where only the Radomites were, only from Radom, from the Radom transport.  And I moved to her block.  The next day it wasn’t alright - because there was one missing here and one extra there.  They wanted to find out who the extra one was and they asked the woman in charge of Radom if there was someone there that was not from Radom but she said: “All of them are from Radom.”  Well, Block ten, the one I was in before, was sent to Stutthof and they sunk the ship.  

Q:  That’s known.  The Germans sunk the entire transport in the Baltic Sea.

A:  And a friend whom I had parted from was there.  I asked her to come with me but she didn’t want to.  And I went to Radom.  Look how it was really the hand of fate.  And I moved to Block 8 and stayed in Auschwitz.

Q:  How long did you stay in Auschwitz?

A:  After I left there then, I was in Auschwitz only for a very short time, through the F camp I somehow moved to Ravensbruck and I was in Ravensbruck another two weeks, I was still sick.  It was still the same illness and that’s why I said before, that when I was in Radom they brought me rainwater to drink because I had a fever and I was still sick.  I arrived in Malhof sick.  Malhof was a weapons factory, not a very large camp with the bunkers for work under the forest.  We had to walk kilometers in the forest until we reached the place of work.  And I worked.  My work was to weigh and of course there were premiums there.  Whoever did well or whoever didn’t do well.  My sister-in-law was wonderful to me then.  She helped me a lot in the camp because she knew how to get along in the camp much better then me.

Q:  You worked weighing gun powder?

A:  I worked on the weapons and she worked on the weapons.  But she was swollen and she could no longer stand the …

Q:  What were the conditions in the camp like?

A:  In Malhof there was a soup that they gave, that’s what there was, and not more than that.  They would give us something at work if someone succeeded in doing more, then he would get another portion of soup, but we did not succeed.  We, my bunker never succeeded. They took me once to work in the latrines since they said that I didn’t weigh well enough.  But they saw that I didn’t work so well there either so they returned me to weighing, weighing gun powder.

Q:  How long were you in Malhof?

Q:  I was in Malhof until the 24th of April.  The only thing that is interesting is that there in Malhof my condition improved much more, because one day my sister-in-law told me: “This morning, during roll call” (we went at night, at night and during the day we worked).  She said to me, “At roll call when you weren’t there already they called out and asked whoever wanted to be a shoemaker, who was a shoemaker there.  They’re looking for a shoemaker.  Tomorrow I’ll say I’m a shoemaker.”  So I said, “If you say you’re a shoemaker, I’ll say you’re not a shoemaker.  They’ll test you and see that you don’t know, I don’t know what they’ll do to you.  I don’t want to be a witness to it.”  So she took the opportunity that I was at work and they told her that they were looking for a shoemaker and she said she was a shoemaker.  And they took her to the shoemaking workshop .  She told the German shoemaker that she knew a bit and that he’d show her a little and she would know how to work.  And she really worked.
	There, whoever worked in the shoemaking shop – it was near the kitchen, all those craftsmen received more soup.  So she had more soup and she began to bring me soup.  Every day she began to bring me a portion of soup and she was happy.

Q:  So your condition improved?

A:  I was in a group of women that I was terribly attached to.  It became a family.  My girlfriends from the camp were more than a family.  So I shared with them and she saw that I was left with nothing.  So what good did it do me?  So one day she said she would ask the shoemaker if he would allow her to bring a sister.  She said I was her sister.  I wasn’t a shoemaker, however, but she would work for me as well and I would work beside her.  And my condition improved.  Suddenly I became a shoemaker in the camp and I could help others.  I brought things to others.  It was the first time that I was in such a situation that I could really help others and my condition really improved.  It was already in the spring.

Q:  In Malhof, when you were in Malhof, you had no connection with the outside world and the Russians were coming closer and they felt that the war was coming to an end.  Did you know that?

A:  I’ll tell you.  One day, for example, the electricity in the bunker broke down.  They brought a Frenchman from the prisoner of war camp to repair the electricity and when he was up there he began to sing.  He knew it was forbidden to talk to us.  But in the bunker there was one Radomite who knew French very well.  He began to sing like in the opera.  He sang and asked her, “Do you know what is gong on?  The war will soon be over.”

Q:  Where did he get this information?

A:  As a prisoner of war, he knew.  He even told us: “From now on every day I’ll throw a parcel of food to you near the camp.  When you go to work, let someone take it”.  After that there was something else.  Our meister, of the shoemaking shop where I worked, he was an old German and not bad.  One day he said: “I’ll give you something for your hard work, you work so beautifully, I’ll take you once on a trip outside the camp.”  “Where will we sleep?”  “You will sleep in Ravensbruck, but during the day I will tour with you outside.”  And everyone wanted.  There were six women who worked there and of course, as fate would have it, he wanted to choose.  I didn’t ask.  I was afraid to part from these girlfriends, that something would happen in the meantime.  So I – he chose me and I went, and another one went with him.  We rode and we were outside.  We stood in the train of ordinary people and I remember that I wore an overcoat because he didn’t want them to see that we are “heftlingen” (from verhaftete – detainees, people under arrest).  An overcoat, then one German touched me and apologized that he touched me and I thought: God in heaven, if you only knew whom you had touched.  That I was a Jewess.  Afterwards we got to a place where we waited, in the train station.  We sat in the waiting room.  Families that were being evacuated were sitting there.  They were simply fleeing from place to place.  We saw that something was happening, that they were fleeing.  So we asked.  And he, the German, he was asleep.  He was sleeping.  And in the meantime , we were young girls, we asked the women: “Where are you traveling from?”  “What traveling?  We’re running away, we have no home.  Our whole city is destroyed and  ????   (the Russians) are so close to here.”  They asked: “Who are you? “  We said we were from a concentration camp.  “What?”  Either they were pretending or they really didn’t know.  They said they didn’t know that such a thing existed.  We said we were Jewesses and that we were in a camp and they pretended that they didn’t know that there was such a thing.
	Then we saw what the situation was and I arrived in the camp with that information.  Two days later we came back and told the women that it wasn’t so nice and since I used to help my girlfriends a lot, I used to bring them something every day.  It was a big thing, they didn’t know how to thank me.
	My birthday is on 24th of April.  I’m registered as 22nd of April but it’s actually the 24th.  My girlfriends didn’t know what to do for me. So they decided to make me a surprise and they organized the place in the????   where I lay down (we slept one beside the other).  They decorated the place with branches of trees that they had brought from the way they came.  And from the bread they got every day they cut it and spread it with something white and on the tope they put pieces of beet and leaves and it was a torte.  When I got back from work, from the shoemaking shop, it was a kind of surprise.  They sand “Happy Birthday to You” and they gave it, they didn’t know what and they sang.  It was April 24, 1945.  I walked in and they all sang so loudly that the S.S. woman came in, the overseer, and she asked, “What’s going on here?”  So we told her.  They told her she has a birthday.  Then she said, “What have we here?”  Because there was one of us who made the cake very artistically.  Very beautiful.  Then she said, “Who knows how to do this?”  And she asked: “Where do you work?”  So I said: “In the shoemaking shop.  I’ll call the meister.  So the meister  said he’d come to me.  She really called the meister and he came to congratulate me.  He said: “Now, tell me, what do you want me to give you for your birthday?”  I said, “Nothing, I only want to be free, not more than that.  And you can’t give me that”.  So then he said, “I will do something for you.  Come with me for a trip.  I’ll say I need to buy leather outside and you’ll be my assistant and we’ll go out of the camp.  And I wore something again so they would not see that I was from the camp – and I went out with him.  When I went out with him I already saw a wagon with a soldier without a belt.  He went over to him and told him something quietly.  Then afterwards he asked me: “Tell me, what would you do if the Americans would take over here and there would be an American victory?  How would you act towards me?”
	So I said, “First of all, that’s impossible.  You know the Reich is the strongest in the world, what then?  To gain control over all of Europe, what are you talking about?”  Then he said, “But tell me, how?”  So I said, “There’s nothing to talk about.”  Then he said, “You know, you have life ahead of you and I think by us everything is all over.”  And we walked and walked and I already began to feel uneasy.  I saw that each time he went over to someone else and whispered to him …
I went back to the camp and I saw red and white ambulances at the entrance to the camp, with a red cross.  There was a line of ambulances.  When we went over and asked what it was, they said they were from the Red Cross.  Right away I took off the coat, and the ambulance driver gave me a bar of chocolate and a package of cigarettes.  There was a kind of passageway, there wasn’t one gate.  There was one entrance and then a second one.  Between one entrance and the other, the shoemaker took the chocolate and the cigarettes from me and left me only one cigarette.  Later that night a thousand women smoked from that cigarette.  And we, the whole camp were outside.  There was panic on the one hand and joy.  They thought it was a trick.  Maybe they decided to take us.  Both others said: “What do they need tricks for?  They can take us just like that and kill us, what do they need it for?”  The next morning the ambulances began – all night we were in a frenzy.  No one slept and we waited for that morning.  In the morning we got into the ambulances and the whole camp moved.

Q:  That was the Bernadotte operation.

A:  Bernadotte, Count Bernadotte.  We got into the ambulances, joyful and the S.S. women asked us at the entrance: “Well, how will you treat us?”  We didn’t say anything.  We rode and while we were traveling those were moments that I thought, I prayed that it would be forever, that it would never end.  I saw with my own eyes Germany burning.  I actually saw fire falling, complete cities were burning and we rode and there was fear but we weren’t afraid from those bombs, as if nothing could happen to us.  At one point we had to stop and we went under the car because there was a very heavy bombardment and we hid and afterwards we resumed the ride.  But we continued, but all the time I cried tears of sadness that all my family did not have the privilege of seeing Germany destroyed and I did not think that it would ever rise again.  I thought that that was the end …

Q:  Where did they send you to?

A: To Denmark.  Those days – I was a few days in Denmark and the enthusiasm of the welcome we received in Denmark is difficult to describe.  I think the entire Danish people came to greet us.

Q:  How many of you were there?

A:  One thousand women.  And I think the whole Danish people.  We were all full of flowers and they received us with such excitement, although there were still Germans that wandered around there: it was still the occupation.  But the Danes behaved differently from the other countries.  They as if did not fear the Germans at all.  They sang us songs …

Q:  From Denmark they took you to Sweden, right?

A:  To Sweden.  We got to Sweden by ship.  And there we were received in a very organized manner, very organized.  Nurses and medical teams received us and we underwent examinations.  We were first in quarantine for a certain period, they examined us.  Whoever was sick was taken to the hospital.  Those who weren’t sick were brought to a vacation camp and we got pocket money, clothes, everything new, everything was burned.  We received new clothes, all new, pocket money and conditions.  We went really from the depths to the heavens.

Q:  How long did you stay in Sweden?

A:  I was nine months in Sweden.  And I worked in Sweden.  I was a month in that vacation camp.  When they came and said whoever in the camp wanted to begin working could, I was among the first six women who said I wanted to go out to work.  I went to Lund – it is a university city and I began to work in a hospital, as help for the nurses at first and then as a practical nurse, I was one already.
My brother brought me, my brother who was in Belgium, he sent me a ticket to Belgium after several months that I was in Sweden.  And from Belgium I arrived in Aliyah Beth to Israel with the ship “Hachayal Haivri”, it was the last ship that did not arrive in Cyprus.  I was three months in Atlit.

Q:  And when did you immigrate to Israel?

A:  In 1946, on August 1st.  I was three months in Atlit and on November 1st I left and I think in December I began to work in the hospital for tuberculosis patients in Safed as a practical nurse in order to prepare myself to enter the nursing school in 1947 in Jerusalem, in the nursing school.

Q: The end of the testimony of Mrs. Yaffa Goldwasser.

End of interview.
